content/06-5_Responsibilities_Resources.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Responsibilities and Resources
parent: Data Management Plans
nav_order: 5
---


# Responsibilities and Resources
{: .no_toc}

Planning data stewardship, resources and costs in your DMP helps to avoid confusion, duplication, or conflict among the research team and other stakeholders, to plan ahead and ensure the availability and suitability of the resources for the data management and sharing needs. It also helps to estimate the costs and benefits of the resources and justify their use.

<p style="margin-top:25px"></p>

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of Content
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
 - TOC
{:toc}
</details>


---
## Responsibilities

Data stewardship ensures that the data is properly managed, maintained, and used throughout the project lifecycle and beyond. It is therefore important to <u>define the data stewardship roles</u> and responsibilities of project members <u>during and after</u> the project. 


<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:30px">
<img src="figures/roles.jpg" width="400"/> </p> 



These roles and responsibilities should include the following elements:

- The **tasks** that each role will perform, such as collecting, cleaning, validating, documenting, sharing, or archiving data. These tasks should align with the project goals, objectives, and deliverables.


- The **duration** of each role's involvement in the project, whether it is for the entire project duration or for a specific phase or activity. This should also indicate when and how the tasks will be completed or transferred to other parties.

<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:30px">
<img src="figures/team-laptops.jpg" width="400"/> </p> 

  

- The **training** that each role will receive to perform their tasks effectively and efficiently. This should cover the technical skills, ethical principles, and best practices of data stewardship. The training should also be tailored to the specific needs and expectations of each role.

- The **succession plan** that will ensure the continuity and quality of data stewardship in case of staff turnover or role changes among data curators. This should describe how the data stewardship responsibilities and knowledge will be transferred to new or existing staff members, and how they will be trained and informed about the data stewardship tasks.



<br>

## Resources and Costs

Data management and long-term access require adequate resources and costs that need to be estimated and described in your project plan. These resources and costs may involve the following elements:

- The **hardware and software** that you will use to store, process, analyze, and share your data.

  e.g purchasing or renting servers, computers, storage devices, databases, applications, or cloud services. 

- The **personnel** that you will hire or assign to perform data management tasks, such as data collection, cleaning, documentation, curation, archiving, or dissemination. 

  e.g. paying salaries, benefits, or fees to data managers, analysts, curators, librarians, or consultants. 

<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:25px">
<img src="figures/resources-costs.jpg" width="400"/>
</p>


- The **training** that you will provide or receive to enhance your data management skills and knowledge. 

  e.g. attending or organizing workshops, courses, webinars, or tutorials on data management topics, such as data quality, ethics, policies, or best practices. 

- The **services** that you will use or provide to facilitate data access and reuse by yourself or others. 

  e.g. subscribing or contributing to data repositories, platforms, portals, or networks that allow you to store, discover, access, or share your data.


More questions regarding responsibilities and resources? Reach out to <arc.support@ubc.ca> or <research.data@ubc.ca> for help.

Commit message:

add style notes and research.data email to all

content/06-5_Responsibilities_Resources.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Responsibilities and Resources
parent: Data Management Plans
nav_order: 5
---


# Responsibilities and Resources
{: .no_toc}

Planning data stewardship, resources and costs in your DMP helps to avoid confusion, duplication, or conflict among the research team and other stakeholders, to plan ahead and ensure the availability and suitability of the resources for the data management and sharing needs. It also helps to estimate the costs and benefits of the resources and justify their use.

<p style="margin-top:25px"></p>

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of Content
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
 - TOC
{:toc}
</details>


---
## Responsibilities

Data stewardship ensures that the data is properly managed, maintained, and used throughout the project lifecycle and beyond. It is therefore important to <u>define the data stewardship roles</u> and responsibilities of project members <u>during and after</u> the project. 


<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:30px">
<img src="figures/roles.jpg" width="400"/> </p> 



These roles and responsibilities should include the following elements:

- The **tasks** that each role will perform, such as collecting, cleaning, validating, documenting, sharing, or archiving data. These tasks should align with the project goals, objectives, and deliverables.


- The **duration** of each role's involvement in the project, whether it is for the entire project duration or for a specific phase or activity. This should also indicate when and how the tasks will be completed or transferred to other parties.

<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:30px">
<img src="figures/team-laptops.jpg" width="400"/> </p> 

  

- The **training** that each role will receive to perform their tasks effectively and efficiently. This should cover the technical skills, ethical principles, and best practices of data stewardship. The training should also be tailored to the specific needs and expectations of each role.

- The **succession plan** that will ensure the continuity and quality of data stewardship in case of staff turnover or role changes among data curators. This should describe how the data stewardship responsibilities and knowledge will be transferred to new or existing staff members, and how they will be trained and informed about the data stewardship tasks.



<br>

## Resources and Costs

Data management and long-term access require adequate resources and costs that need to be estimated and described in your project plan. These resources and costs may involve the following elements:

- The **hardware and software** that you will use to store, process, analyze, and share your data.

  e.g purchasing or renting servers, computers, storage devices, databases, applications, or cloud services. 

- The **personnel** that you will hire or assign to perform data management tasks, such as data collection, cleaning, documentation, curation, archiving, or dissemination. 

  e.g. paying salaries, benefits, or fees to data managers, analysts, curators, librarians, or consultants. 

<p style="margin-top:25px;margin-left:25px">
<img src="figures/resources-costs.jpg" width="400"/>
</p>


- The **training** that you will provide or receive to enhance your data management skills and knowledge. 

  e.g. attending or organizing workshops, courses, webinars, or tutorials on data management topics, such as data quality, ethics, policies, or best practices. 

- The **services** that you will use or provide to facilitate data access and reuse by yourself or others. 

  e.g. subscribing or contributing to data repositories, platforms, portals, or networks that allow you to store, discover, access, or share your data.

---

Need help?
{: .label .label-blue }
  `More questions regarding responsibilities and resources? Reach out to `arc.support@ubc.ca` or `research.data@ubc.ca` for help.
