content/06_Data_Management_Plan.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Data Management Plan
has_children: true
nav_order: 9
---

<p style="margin-top:25px">
<img src="figures/work-in-progress.png" width="600"/>
</p>

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
 - TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---


# Why Create DMPs?

**A Data Management Plan (DMP)** is a short, formal document which clearly articulates the strategies and tools you will implement to effectively manage your data. It speaks to the management of data both <b>during</b> the active phases of your research and <b>after</b> the completion of the research project. 

<a href="https://science.gc.ca/site/science/en/interagency-research-funding/policies-and-guidelines/research-data-management/tri-agency-research-data-management-policy">The Tri-Agency Research Data Management Policy</a> states that: "All grant proposals submitted to the agencies should include methodologies that reflect best practices in RDM (Research Data Management). For certain funding opportunities (listed below), the agencies will *require data management plans (DMPs)* to be submitted to the appropriate agency at the time of application, as outlined in the call for proposals; in these cases, the DMPs will be considered in the adjudication process."

Looking for a cheat sheet? Check out our <a href="https://osf.io/wmh5n" target="_blank">one-pager</a>!
{: .note }

## Funding requiring DMPs

So far, we are seeing the following funding opportunities requiring DMPs, in addition to all CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation) applications:

### CIHR

- Network Grants in Skin Health and Muscular Dystrophy (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Data Science for Equity (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Virtual Care/Digital Health Team Grants (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Team Grant: Strengthening the Health Workforce for System Transformation (Summer 2023)

### NSERC

- Subatomic Physics Discovery Grants program (Individual and Project) for fall 2023.

### SHHRC

- Partnership Grants Phase 2 (2023)

<br>

## General Notes for DMP creation

- When creating your research project's DMP, it's important to begin with a **general description** that outlines the project's focus and purpose. 
- Keep in mind that the DMP should be easily understood by anyone, so try to **avoid using excessive discipline-specific jargon**. 
- If you do need to use acronyms, be sure to define them for clarity.
- Not all sections or questions in the DMP may be applicable to your specific project, so feel free to leave them blank if necessary. 
- Additionally, consider including <a href="https://orcid.org" target="_blank"> **ORCIDs**</a> (Open Researcher and Contributor IDs) for the researchers involved. ORCIDs provide metadata that ensure appropriate academic credits are attributed.

Remember that your DMP is a living document that should be **regularly updated** as needed, similar to your README file and data dictionary. By doing so, you can ensure that your research project is *well-documented* and aligned with *best practices* in data management.
{: .note }


<br>


## The Tool to Create DMPs
To create your DMP, please use <a href="https://assistant.portagenetwork.ca/tool" target="_blank"> DMP Assistant</a>, a free, open-source Canadian tool for preparing DMPs. The tool follows best practices in data stewardship and walks researchers step-by-step through key questions about data management. DMP Assistant is designed to meet the requirements of these Canadian funders:

- Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI)
- Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
- Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)
- Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC)

DMP Assistant is available in *both English and French*. It allows you to create and export your DMP. UBC has a **general template for UBC researchers**. 

The Canadian Libraries' Portage community has also collaborated on some excellent <a href="https://zenodo.org/communities/portage-network/search?page=1&size=20&q=exemplar">**exemplars** </a>. These exemplars cover a range of disciplines and research methods, highlight best practices for DMPs in those disciplines, and provide a reference point for researchers writing their own DMPs.


<br>
 
The following content should be considered in order to create a meaningful DMP:

Commit message:

draft of complete 06_Data_Management_Plan

content/06_Data_Management_Plan.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Data Management Plan
has_children: true
nav_order: 9
has_toc: false
---

<p style="margin-top:25px">
<img src="figures/work-in-progress.png" width="600"/>
</p>

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
 - TOC
{:toc}
</details>

---


# Why Create DMPs?

**A Data Management Plan (DMP)** is a short, formal document which clearly articulates the strategies and tools you will implement to effectively manage your data. It speaks to the management of data both <b>during</b> the active phases of your research and <b>after</b> the completion of the research project. 

<a href="https://science.gc.ca/site/science/en/interagency-research-funding/policies-and-guidelines/research-data-management/tri-agency-research-data-management-policy">The Tri-Agency Research Data Management Policy</a> states that: "All grant proposals submitted to the agencies should include methodologies that reflect best practices in RDM (Research Data Management). For certain funding opportunities (listed below), the agencies will *require data management plans (DMPs)* to be submitted to the appropriate agency at the time of application, as outlined in the call for proposals; in these cases, the DMPs will be considered in the adjudication process."

Looking for a cheat sheet? Check out our <a href="https://osf.io/wmh5n" target="_blank">one-pager</a>!
{: .note }

## Funding requiring DMPs

So far, we are seeing the following funding opportunities requiring DMPs, in addition to all CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation) applications:

### CIHR

- Network Grants in Skin Health and Muscular Dystrophy (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Data Science for Equity (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Virtual Care/Digital Health Team Grants (launch fall 2022 / winter 2023)
- Team Grant: Strengthening the Health Workforce for System Transformation (Summer 2023)

### NSERC

- Subatomic Physics Discovery Grants program (Individual and Project) for fall 2023.

### SHHRC

- Partnership Grants Phase 2 (2023)

<br>

# General Notes for DMP creation

- When creating your research project's DMP, it's important to begin with a **general description** that outlines the project's focus and purpose. 
- Keep in mind that the DMP should be easily understood by anyone, so try to **avoid using excessive discipline-specific jargon**. 
- If you do need to use acronyms, be sure to define them for clarity.
- Not all sections or questions in the DMP may be applicable to your specific project, so feel free to leave them blank if necessary. 
- Additionally, consider including <a href="https://orcid.org" target="_blank"> **ORCIDs**</a> (Open Researcher and Contributor IDs) for the researchers involved. ORCIDs provide metadata that ensure appropriate academic credits are attributed.

Remember that your DMP is a living document that should be **regularly updated** as needed, similar to your README file and data dictionary. By doing so, you can ensure that your research project is *well-documented* and aligned with *best practices* in data management.
{: .note }


<br>


# The Tool to Create DMPs
To create your DMP, please use <a href="https://assistant.portagenetwork.ca/tool" target="_blank"> DMP Assistant</a>, a free, open-source Canadian tool for preparing DMPs. The tool follows best practices in data stewardship and walks researchers step-by-step through key questions about data management. DMP Assistant is designed to meet the requirements of these Canadian funders:

- Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI)
- Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
- Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)
- Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC)

DMP Assistant is available in *both English and French*. It allows you to create and export your DMP. UBC has a **general template for UBC researchers**. 

The Canadian Libraries' Portage community has also collaborated on some excellent <a href="https://zenodo.org/communities/portage-network/search?page=1&size=20&q=exemplar">**exemplars** </a>. These exemplars cover a range of disciplines and research methods, highlight best practices for DMPs in those disciplines, and provide a reference point for researchers writing their own DMPs.


<br>
 
# These sections should be considered to create a meaningful DMP:
1. [Data Collection](06-1_Data_Collection.md)
2. [Documentation and Metadata](06-2_Documentation_Metadata.md)
3. [Storage and Backup](06-3_Storage_Backup.md)
4. [Data Preservation](06-4_Data_Preservation.md)
5. [Data Sharing and Reuse](06-5_Data_Sharing.md)
6. [Responsibilities and Resources](06-6_Responsibilities_Resources.md)
7. [Ethcis and Legal Compliance](06-7_Ethics_Legal.md)
